+++
title = "The Verisimilitude of Veracity"

date = 2016-04-20
lastmod = 2018-01-13
draft = false

tags = ["Philosophy"]
category = ["Musings"]

summary = "The phrase \"it’s not an exact science\" often surprises me, mainly because nothing probably is. To an outside observer it may seem to be a craft of precision, but its practitioners know that if anything, science and engineering is fundamentally comprised of abstraction and approximation. The greatest engineering marvels, the most breathtaking scientific breakthroughs are nothing but an approximation with tolerances. A probability, that in all sense of practicality, the stated hypothesis is true. Engineers have a word for the process of approximation inherent in their design process; they call it \"eyeballing it\". Slang for approximation a particular measurement that is perhaps too tedious, or too complicated to account for, and can be successfully approximated with little consequence to the overall system."

[header]
image = "headers/Astronaut_photograph_ISS053-E-127736.jpg"
caption = "Image credit: [**NASA**](https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=91941&src=iotdrss)"


+++

The phrase “it’s not an exact science” often surprises me, mainly because nothing probably is. To an outside observer it may seem to be a craft of precision, but its practitioners know that if anything, science and engineering is fundamentally comprised of abstraction and approximation. The greatest engineering marvels, the most breathtaking scientific breakthroughs are nothing but an approximation with tolerances. A probability, that in all sense of practicality, the stated hypothesis is true. Engineers have a word for the process of approximation inherent in their design process; they call it “eyeballing it”. Slang for approximation a particular measurement that is perhaps too tedious, or too complicated to account for, and can be successfully approximated with little consequence to the overall system.

Take for example, the process of construction of a suspension bridge. Although, hundreds of simulations studies are conducted, and every possible parameter that may influence the stability of the bridge is modeled, at the very end of it, each of these computer models, no matter how complex and detailed, are just approximations. They are mathematical analogies of our understanding of the forces of nature which govern the stability of the bridge. It is impossible to completely replicate every intricacy of real life in a computer program.
Measurement itself is a process of estimation. A measurement is nothing more than an estimate of how closely an unknown quantity matches a known articulated standard. An attempt can be made only to reduce the errors, never completely eliminate them, hence making it impossible to have a precise measurement. A component of the bridge that seems to be accurately crafted when measured with a tape measure would seem abysmally erroneous when measured with a micrometer. One must realize, that no matter how careful the experiment, no matter how precise the measurement, there will be always an inherent unpredictability and an imprecision that consorts the apparatus.

Basic sciences are not bereft of approximations either. Scientists just have a better word for it. They call it “outliers”, data points or observations that do not match the hypothesis. In fact, they look upon these with disdain, as if it is the natural phenomenon’s fault that it cannot be correctly explained by the human created theory.

Our current understanding of the universe, and its most fundamental processes are somewhat lacking. We are not exactly sure what at the tiniest level, the universe is made of. Does the universe comprise of tiny orbs, probabilistic clouds or tiny vibrating stings? No one is sure yet. Light is something we see all around us, and yet its true nature has not been illuminated. We do not know if it is a particle or a wave. Perhaps our basic concept of light is completely wrong, and it is something else altogether. We can’t really be sure, but we still can explain most of light’s behavior with our theories of electromagnetism. Yet another beautiful example of how verisimilitude and not veracity construes the supposedly precise craft of science.

This propensity of approximation is carried forward to grass root science teaching. The simplistic Bohr’s model of the atom, the one in which electrons orbit around the nucleus much like planets orbit around a star, which is taught in schools, is a euphemism at best. As we currently understand them, electrons do not orbit the nucleus but exist as probability clouds around the nucleus which may be anything from a simple spherical to a complex lobular-donut-shape. The simplistic view is then a simplification made to allow students to grasp the overall concept of an atom, without having to descend into the details of quantum mechanics. This is just one of several concepts that have been perhaps over-simplified or even slightly falsified at the elementary level to aid teaching. Is it then right for educators to, in a sense, mislead an individual in the persons understanding phase, only to correct them at a later stage in their learning when ideas have already been firmly implanted in their now non impressionable minds? Perhaps, it is, for abstraction has always been a key tool in human comprehension.

A person may not fully understand the algorithms that are engaged in rendering this post on your screen for example, or exactly what causes the text to move when one engages the scroll wheel, but he or she is fully capable of using the computer system to read this and many other pages. Abstraction has always been a core component of understanding. It is natural for the mind to gloss over the nitty-gritty details that it is not fully capable of absorbing, until it gets the overall picture. And this process is natural and happens without conscious effort. When first presented with an image, the mind tends to first take in the general color scheme, shapes and outlines first, and only when a general understanding has been established, it takes cognizance of the textural details. Every germ of an idea that incubates in your mind, first starts as a broad definition, only imbibing details as the mind proceeds to build upon it. Similarly, one may only begin to unlock the mysteries of the universe, when one can postpone the details and concentrate on the matter as a whole. A little conceit may be permitted in teaching, because the process of human though creation: thinking is in itself is an approximation.

The impression of precision comes perhaps from the fact that scientific endeavor typically deals with mathematics which is perceived to be exact. Math is expected to deliver explicit results, which are clear cut, exact and determinate. But one must realize mathematics in itself is a form of art, which deals with numbers and all the rules concerning them. But each of these numbers, all the rules and the entire symphony we call mathematics, is a flight of fancy of human imagination. At the very fundamental, the number system in itself is riddled with inconsistencies. Our number system in itself may be incapable of dealing with the universe in its entirety. As a simple example consider a square that is 2 meters by 2 meters in dimension. This is a very real object that I can draw in the physical world. However if I try to measure its diagonal, I am vexed with a very perplexing difficulty. Our laws of mathematics say that the length of its diagonal should be the square root of two, but this is an irrational number. A number which cannot be determined exactly, which has an infinite number of decimal digits and can only be approximated. And thus our number system fails to meet the needs of a very simple physical phenomenon. Numbers, equations and the art of mathematics, so precise and exacting in demeanor, in itself is an approximation.

Then one would agree that science is then not entirely a left brain, analytical, clear-cut craft of precision, but to some extent a right brained, creative pursuit that needs to make some leeway for the imprecision and approximation that govern the very basis of it. Perhaps, we must also concede, that after all these years, and all our collective musings about the universe and its secrets, we still have not even scratched the surface. There are a lot of mysteries out there that lay under a shroud, a beautifully complex universe out there to discover, and the only way to begin to comprehend it, is to keep asking the right questions and sometimes, and be prepared for some erratum in the answers.
